---> Offensive Security Intro
Offensive Security is about thinking like an attacker to find weaknesses before real hackers do.
Offensive Security is the term which describes simulating a hacker's actions to find system vulnerabilities.
---> Defensive Security Intro
Defensive Security is also known as blue teaming.
Defensive Security teams play a key role in protecting networks & organisations across the globe.
***A ransomware attack is a type of malicious software (malware) that encrypts a victim’s data, systems or files,
rendering them inaccessible until a ransom, typically in cryptocurrency, is paid.
These attacks frequently target education, government, and healthcare sectors to steal sensitive information & cause operational downtime.
---> Responsibilities of Defensive Security
1. Monitoring & Detecting:
Continually observing organisation's network & system activity to identify suspicious behaviour & events.
The frontline of protecting the organisation.
These may include, for example,
Monitoring for logins from another country while the employee is based in the company's London office.
2. Incident Response:
The team quickly comes together if suspicious activity is confirmed & alerts are raised.
This is when the Incident Response process begins.
The process involves containing & removing the threat & restoring the business back to normality.
An Incident Responder is responsible for investigating & responding to ongoing security incidents withing the organisation.
They'll monitor & prevent attackers in real time & share lessons learned during the attack to prevent future incidents.
3. Threat Intelligence:
Gathering & using information about attackers like their latest methods, targets & trends can greatly strengthen an organisation’s defences.
For example, understanding that an attacker focuses on a specific software application used within organisations.
4. Vulnerability Management:
Fixing software or system flaws is an important preventative measure that can lower the risk of an attack.
Security teams can check which systems attackers are most likely to target. This can be done manually or with the help of automated tools.
5. Investigation & Analysis:
Members of a defensive security team are always monitoring & analysing what’s happening inside an organisation.
They work to separate normal activity from suspicious behaviour, digging into the details like solving a puzzle to uncover valuable insights.
6. Digital Forensics:
Will utilise their expertise to understand what occurred during an incident.
They will gather, preserve & analyse evidence from the network & systems to uncover vital information about the attackers & their methods.
7. Security Engineer:
Develops & maintains the essential tools & systems that support the defensive security team.
These systems enable the team to monitor, investigate & explore events within an organisation.
---> Defensive Security in Practice
Organisations don’t rely on a single tool or method to stay secure,
they build layers of defence, much like an onion or many layers to a castle.
We call this "Defence in Depth," meaning that if one security measure fails,
we have others to rely upon at various stages.
Examples of these defensive measures include:
1. Employee Training:
In today's world, the human factor of cyber security cannot be ignored.
With attacks more often than not targeting employees rather than systems,
training employees to be proactive in recognising attempts for things like phishing is essential.
***Phishing: When emails are sent to a target(s) purporting to be from a trusted entity to lure individuals into providing sensitive information.
2. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS):
These devices act as surveillance cameras across the organisation's IT.
They monitor and alert when suspicious behaviour or activity is detected across the network or systems.
3. Firewalls:
These devices act as security guards on an organisation's network.
They monitor & determine what traffic is allowed to enter the network, or should be rejected.
4. Security Policies
Security policies help organisations ensure that their systems are used correctly.
They can reduce risk by blocking access to dangerous websites or requiring strong passwords, making it harder for attackers to guess login details.
***This means that even if an employee clicks on a dangerous attachment in an email,
other protections are in place to prevent the malicious attachment from harming the organisation.
Defensive security teams rely on a wide range of tools & technologies.
These tools allow professionals to analyse information & investigate threats more effectively.
Key technologies commonly used by defensive security teams worldwide:
--->Security Operations Centre (SOC):
the defensive security centre for an organisation's technology.
This busy centre is the frontline of protecting an organisation, often operating around the clock, 365 days a year &
employs a variety of security professionals who monitor & protect the organisation's networks, systems & data.
***A typical day in the SOC could look like:
Reviewing alerts triggered by security tooling
Investigating anomalies
Responding to incidents
These professionals are often the eyes and ears on the frontline for protecting an organisation.
---> SIEMs: The Defensive Security Radar
SIEMs (Security Information and Event Management) systems are the central place for all data &
information collected from security devices, workstations, servers & more within an organisation.
Much like radar sweeping the digital environment, these systems are an absolutely critical part of any organisation's defensive security,
as they offer insight into what is happening within the organisation's IT.
The systems inside an organisation produce a large amount of information.
This information needs to be brought together in one central and easy-to-access place to understand what's happening quickly & clearly.
This way, several people can review and analyse it quickly.
---> Careers in Cyber
Cybersecurity has many career paths, from breaking into systems (offensive security) to defending organisations from attacks (defensive security).
1. Security Analysis:
Security analysts are often referred to as the digital defenders of an organisation and sit on the blue team.
These people monitor, investigate & respond to activity taking place on an organisation's devices & network and play a significant role in an organisation's defence.
Using their skills, security analysts investigate & piece together potential security incidents known as alerts to decide if further action is needed & respond appropriately.
An example of a potential security incident is an employee who works in the London office who suddenly logs in from another country.
An investigation is required to determine if this is legitimate.
***A Typical Day as a Security Analyst Involves:
Monitoring activity taking place on the devices & network of the organisation.
Investigating unusual or suspicious activity, such as strange logins.
Piecing together information to understand what has happened, when & how.
Working with other teams to improve the organisation's defences.
Security Analyst is a broad entry point into defensive security, with many paths to specialise later.
You can move into areas like threat hunting, incident response or malware analysis.
Incident responders handle active attacks, while malware analysts examine the tools & code used by attackers.
2. Security Engineering:
At a high level, Security Engineers build & maintain the systems & processes that protect an organisation's network & devices
and are known as the architects of cyber security.
For example, a Security Engineer will be responsible for maintaining an Intrusion Detection System (IDS),
which can be considered a security camera within an organisation's digital environment.
Systems like these use a mixture of rules & intelligence to detect & prevent attacks from occurring.
***A Typical Day as a Security Engineer Involves:
Designing & maintaining security systems.
Keeping up to date with the latest & greatest hacker techniques being used.
Documenting processes & procedures.
Assessing risk & making sure systems & applications are protected against vulnerabilities.
Security engineering is already a specialised defensive role, but you can go even deeper into areas like application security or cloud security.
The skills you build here also transfer well into other fields, including offensive security.
3. Penetration Testing:
penetration testing is often referred to as “pentesting” or “ethical hacking.”
A penetration tester’s job is to check how secure a company’s systems & software are by safely trying to break into them.
They search for weaknesses & vulnerabilities and then test if those can be exploited, just like a real hacker would, but in a safe and controlled way.
 Everything is done under an agreement between the company & the pentester.
This process is known as an engagement.
The results of these tests help the company understand risks & address problems before real cybercriminals can exploit them.
***A Typical Day as a Penetration Tester Involves:
Testing the security of computer systems, networks & websites.
Performing security assessments, audits & analysing security policies.
Analysing the results & creating reports, advising an organisation on how to prevent the attack from occurring.
Penetration testing is a strong starting point for an offensive security career.
You can specialise in areas like network or web application testing & later progress into red teaming,
where you simulate full-scale, long-term attacks across an entire organisation, sometimes even involving physical intrusion.
engRed teaming is a senior, advanced progression from pentesting.
